---
title: Dashboards
description: Learn how to configure Zelij dashboards
---

Dashboards in Zelij are made up of tiles of charts.

You can create dashboards in two ways:
- [Via the UI](#create-a-dashboard-via-the-ui): Use Zelij’s built-in dashboard editor to add, move, and configure charts visually. Once you're happy with the result, you can export the YAML configuration directly from the UI.
- [Via YAML](#create-a-dashboard-via-yaml): Define dashboards by writing YAML configuration files manually inside the zelij_config/ directory.

We recommend starting with the UI and exporting YAML as a quick way to bootstrap new dashboards.

## Create a dashboard via the UI 
You can create an in-memory dashboard :
- by clicking **Creation** in the top bar and selecting **New Dashboard**
- inside a Data App by clicking the **...** button next to the Data App title and selecting **Create dashboard**

After creating a dashboard in the UI, We recommend [Exporting dashboards](#exporting-yaml-dashboards)

### Exporting YAML dashboards
After creating/editing a dashboard, you can click the **Export** button to see the YAML code for that dashboard.

You can then copy/paste that YAML code into a YAML file in the `zelij_config` directory.

## Create a dashboard via YAML

You define dashboards using YAML files in the `zelij_config/` directory.

It's recommended to [Create a dashboard via the UI](#create-a-dashboard-via-the-ui) and export the YAML code. 

YAML code can also be generated by a LLM after you provided a [prompt that explains the Zelij context](/docs/llm_prompt).

YAML can of course be modified manually. The next section explains the configuration for that purpose.

---

## Configuration

To define a dashboard, you need to complete 3 steps : 
- [add a YAML configuration for the Dashboard](#1-yaml-configuration)
- [parse the configuration](#2-parse-the-configuration)

### 1. YAML configuration

Create or update a YAML file in the `zelij_config/` directory to include a `dashboards` section like this:

```yaml
dashboards:
  - name: UI_dashboard
    label: UI dashboard
    description: Description
    tiles:
      - "6":
          min:
            w: 1
            h: 1
          max: {}
          x: 0
          y: 0
          w: 3
          h: 4
          id: _c5z10g2d9
        id: _c5z10g2d9
        chartConfiguration:
          type: ui
          configuration:
            dataset: sales_orders
            mainDimension: shipCountry
            mainMetric:
              column: customerId
              aggregation: count
            secondaryMetrics: []
            seriesList:
              - column: count_customerId
                type: bar
            dimensionOnXAxis: true
            chartProperties:
              chartLabel: "# Customers per country"
              chartDescription: test
```

### Key Fields

#### High level fields

* `name`: Unique dashboard identifier.
* `label` User-facing title for the dashboard.
* `description`: Optional text displayed in the UI.
* `tiles`: A list of grid tiles (widgets) that contain charts.

#### Tiles & Layout

Each tile includes grid positioning data based on [svelte-grid](https://github.com/vaheqelyan/svelte-grid):

* `x`, `y`: grid coordinates
* `w`, `h`: width and height in grid units
* `min` / `max`: optional layout constraints

You can find the complete specification for the grid in [svelte-grid documentation](https://svelte-grid.vercel.app/usage)

#### Chart Configuration

Each tile has a `chartConfiguration` object that defines the chart content:

* `type`:
  Can be `"ui"` or `"advanced"` depending on how the chart was created.
* `configuration`:
  Includes chart specific configuration, depending on the `type`.

For charts of `type: ui`, the configuration is defined using primitives like:

* `dataset`
* `mainDimension`
* `mainMetric` (+ `aggregation`)
* `chartLabel`, `chartDescription`
* Optional: `secondaryDimension`, `secondaryMetrics`, and `seriesList`

For charts of `type: advanced`, the configuration is defined using primitives like:
* `sqlQuery`: the SQL query that will produce the dataset for the chart. The dialect must be compliant with DuckDB.
* `chartOptions` : the Apache ECharts JSON chart options. You can find the complete reference in [Apache ECharts documentation](https://echarts.apache.org/en/option.html#title).



## 2. Parse the configuration

Once defined in a YAML inside the `zelij_config` directory, the dashboard becomes available automatically after running:

```bash
npm run parse-config
```

It will appear in your Zelij app and can be served or deployed as part of a static website.

